docs: proposal for switching gateways to a central agent (#1855)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/arch/018-switch-from-gateways-to-a-central-agent.md

# 17. Switch from Gateways to a central Agent

Date: 2025-02-17

## Status

Proposed

## Context

The current architecture defines a set of central Gateways with the single purpose of enriching the data and dispatching it to the backend. That approach had good reasons in the past but a situation is reached were the drawbacks seem to overweight benefits.

![arch](./../assets/otlp-gateway-old.drawio.svg)

> The benefits of Gateways are:

Author: It is more about that approach/design

- separation of concerns
  It is always good to have clean responsibilities to keep code better maintainable. Here, the gateways will do enrichment and dispatching, while agents to data collection only
- decoupling of signal types
  Processing the signal types in separate processes keep the processing tolerant to failures. An overload of metrics will keep the log delivery stable.
- tail-based sampling
  Scenarios like trace sampling requires processing all spans of a trace at one instance, requiring a StatefulSet with sticky trace routing. However, that scenario might not be relevant as this will be done on the backend usually.

The drawback of Gateways are:
- no uniform push endpoint

>   by design there is a gateway per signal type were the application need to communicate to. With that you need to configure an individual OTLP endpoint per signal type always. Having an uniform URL will require an additional component route the requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  By design, there is one gateway for each signal type that the application must communicate with. Consequently, you must always configure a separate OTLP endpoint for each signal type. Using a uniform URL requires an additional component to route the requests.
```

- no localhost support

>   A typical approach is to run an agent per node having a host port available where the node-local applications can push the data to. That communication will be very reliable and fast and requires no encryption. Also, the default setting of the otel-sdk will work at any time, no kyma specific endpoint required at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  A typical approach is to run an agent per node having a host port available where the node-local applications can push the data. That communication is very reliable and fast and requires no encryption. Also, the default setting of the OTel-SDK works at any time, and no Kyma-specific endpoint is required.
```

- autoscaling is tricky

>   The gateway should provide autoscaling capabilities which are tricky to realize. It must be detected very fast if a scale out is needed and it situations were the backend is overloaded must be excluded from scale out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  The gateway should provide autoscaling capabilities which are tricky to realize. It must be detected very fast if a scale-out is needed and situations where the backend is overloaded must be excluded from the scale-out.
```

> - every instance caches whole cluster state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- every instance caches the whole cluster state
```

>   Every instance of a gateway must be able to enrich data of every pod and with that need to cache all pod metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  Every instance of a gateway must be able to enrich the data of every Pod and with that need to cache all Pod metadata.
```

- Istio mandatory for load balancing

>   Pushing OTLP data from an application to the gateway running with replicas requires loadbalancing. Unfortunately, a kubernetes service is acting on L4 and while GRPC/HTTP2 is on L/, so an additional loadbalancer is needed. That can be easily solved by using Istio, but it becomes a mandatory requirement for applications. However, there can be applications not using Istio (Statefulets often don't do) and like to provide OTLP data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  Pushing OTLP data from an application to the gateway running with replicas requires load balancing. Unfortunately, a Kubernetes service is acting on L4 while GRPC/HTTP2 is on L/, so an additional load balancer is needed. That can be easily solved by using Istio, which becomes a requirement for applications. However, some applications don't use Istio (StatefulSets often don't) but want to provide OTLP data.
```

- Istio is mandatory for mTLS

>   App to Gateway communication is across nodes and with that should use mTLS, so Istio needs to be used which sometimes is not possible. Also, Istio causes additional overhead like noise filtering

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  App to Gateway communication is across nodes and with that should use mTLS, so Istio needs to be used which sometimes is not possible. Also, Istio causes additional overhead like noise filtering.
```

> - cumulativetodelta transformation not suppoerted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- cumulativetodelta transformation not supported
```
or "cumulative to delta"?

>   This transformation is mandatory for Dynatrace support and requires that data from a pod gets processed always by the same instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  This transformation is mandatory for Dynatrace support and requires that data from a Pod gets processed always by the same instance.
```

- General misconception

>   Gateways are usually running outside the cluster as a first entry point. The cluster should get rid of the data as fast as possible as persistence cannot be provided here (thinks like Kafka would again run outside). Try to compensate for short-lived hickups but otherwise just point back the backpressure to the client and do not try to solve the big picture

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  Gateways are usually running outside the cluster as a first entry point. The cluster should get rid of the data as fast as possible as persistence cannot be provided here (things like Kafka would again run outside). Try to compensate for short-lived hiccups. Otherwise, point back the backpressure to the client and do not try to solve the big picture.
```

## Proposal

> Most of the drawbacks can be solved by running the gateway logic node-local only. Every instance always processes only data of the local node. With that a natural scalability is given and can be extended by vertical scaling capabilities. The "old" gateways will be running in agent mode but still called "OTLP Gateway"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the drawbacks can be solved by running the gateway logic node-local only. Every instance always processes only data from the local node. With that, a natural scalability is given and can be extended by vertical scaling capabilities. The "old" gateways will be running in agent mode but still called "OTLP Gateway".
```

![arch](./../assets/otlp-gateway-new.drawio.svg)

> The left drawbacks of the agent approach are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining drawbacks of the agent approach are:
```

- coupling of signal types

>   The decoupling of the signal types will be lost, potentially leading to situations where the agent drops logs caused by metrics overload. However, with the right hardening that should not be a problem

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  The decoupling of the signal types will be lost, potentially leading to situations where the agent drops logs caused by metrics overload. However, with the right hardening that should not be a problem.
```

> - Downtimes on updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- downtimes on updates
```
let's consistently use the lower case

>   A rollout of the agent cannot happen in a rolling way, especially of the host port assignment. So there will be a downtime always which should be compoensated by the retry mechanism in the otel-sdk

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  A rollout of the agent cannot happen in a rolling way, especially of the host port assignment. So there will be a downtime always which should be compensated by the retry mechanism in the OTel-SDK.
```

- host port conflicts

>   The user might serve already the OTLP ports on every port

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  The user might serve already the OTLP ports on every port.
```

> Additional benefits not outlined yet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional benefits not outlined yet:
```

- persistent queue everywhere

>   A small persistent buffer could be used in all components based on the node file system

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  A small persistent buffer could be used in all components based on the node file system.
```

> - No Istio dependency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- no Istio dependency
```

>   There is no Istio dependency at all anymore, no at the App and not at the components. However, the metric agent should still support scraping of istiofied endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  Neither the App nor the components have any Istio dependency anymore. However, the metric agent should still support the scraping of istiofied endpoints.
```
You did not mean " istiofied", did you? Should these be "istiofield" instead? I wasn't sure...

Author: The Istiofication of workloads is progressing fast, haven't you realized :) I meant it like that :)

## Migration considerations

> Unifying the three gateways into one agent should be possible without attention by the user. The API stays compatible, and there should be no direct exposure of the architecture to the user. Still, two problems need to be addressed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unifying the three gateways into one agent should be possible without user engagement. The API stays compatible, and the architecture shouldn't be directly exposed to the user. Still, two problems must be addressed:
```

- Push endpoint compatibility

>   It is not possible to simply switch to t localhost push endpoint, the URLs are used in running software via env variables. So they must stay compatible. Luckily, this can be achieved easily by adjusting the services to point to the new agents using the [internalTrafficPolicy: local](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/networking/virtual-ips/#internal-traffic-policy) on the service

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  It is not possible to simply switch to the localhost push endpoint. The URLs are used in running software via env variables so they must stay compatible. Luckily, this can be achieved easily by adjusting the services to point to the new agents using the [internalTrafficPolicy: local](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/networking/virtual-ips/#internal-traffic-policy) on the service.
```

> - the host ports might be in use already. The manager need to detect that and adjust the module status accordingly. When doing a migration, the situation must be checked upfront.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The host ports are already in use 

  The manager must detect that and adjust the module status accordingly. When migrating, the situation must be checked upfront.
```

## Conclusion

> The former motivation of the gateway concept turned out to be not that relevant. Switching to an agent approach solves a ton of problems while introducing very soft drawbacks. The transformation should start immediately :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The former motivation of the gateway concept turned out to be no longer relevant. Switching to the agent approach solves many problems while introducing very soft drawbacks. The transformation should start immediately :)
```

# 19. Switch from Gateways to a Central Agent

Date: 2025-02-17

## Status

Proposed

## Context

The current architecture defines a set of central Gateways to enrich the data and dispatch it to the backend. That approach had good reasons in the past, but now the drawbacks outweigh the benefits.

![arch](./../assets/otlp-gateway-old.drawio.svg)

> The benefits of gateways are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Gateways Benefits

```
I would create subsections for the benefits and drawbacks so that they stick out from the context.

- separation of concerns

  It is always good to have clear responsibilities to keep code better maintainable. Therefore, gateways deal with enrichment and dispatching, while agents are responsible for data collection.
- decoupling of signal types

  Processing the signal types in separate processes keeps the processing tolerant to failures. An overload of metrics keeps the log delivery stable.
- tail-based sampling

  Scenarios like trace sampling require processing all spans of a trace at one instance, requiring a StatefulSet with sticky trace routing. However, that scenario might not be relevant as this isn't usually done on the backend.

> The drawbacks of gateways are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Gateways Drawbacks

```
